#Introduction>*"Often the importance of ecosystem services is widely appreciated only upon their loss"*
>
>\
>
> *Gretchen Daily, in The Value of Nature and the Nature of Value*
> 

## Background 

### Ecosystem services
Food, water, fuel, fiber, timber, pollination, purification, medicinal plants, inspirational and recreational landscapes are examples of essential gifts from nature making life possible and worthwhile. These are defined as ecosystem services. They can be tangible or intangible.Some are obvious, some are less. Forests, for example, not only provide a natural carbon storage that helps regulate climate, but also hold soil in place along streams, therefore improving water quality, which benefits for people downstream. Habitats in rivers and along coastlines support populations of fish that provide food, including in areas of chronic food insecurity. Biodiversity stabilize ecosystems [@cardinale2012]. Mangroves stabilize shorelines and decrease damage to people and property from storms. Oceans also store carbon. (TODO reference)

These services rely on complex interactions of many forms of natural capital; the ecosystems that surround us are essential to our survival and well-being, and are the bedrock of a sustainable economy. Nature and people form the biosphere, caring for the former equates to caring for the latter and vice versa. Increasingly, we can map the most important forests, coastal habitats and other ecosystems and show how they support us. This is crucial in order to prioritize the use of resources and sustainably manage our natural world. In short, nature is at the source of human well-being: people depend on nature. 

However, about 60% of the ecosystem services are being degraded[^2back] or are not used sustainably. Not only depletion of natural capital is a major loss of natural asset, but it harms significantly human well-being [@Millennium2005]. Furthermore, the relationships between harm to an ecosystem and loss in its services are rarely linear and generally the impacts are multiplied and affect every dependant ecosystem process [@cardinale2012].

[^2back]: evaluated by the Millenium Assessments [@Millennium2005].

As the abundance of natural capital decreases, due to clear and increasing human alteration [@Vitousek494], citizens and scholars are increasingly highlighting the urgency of taking action. To do so, efficient policy design requires a strong (often quantitative) understanding of ecosystem services functioning.

###Natural capital assessments

The benefits nature provides to people and the economy are difficult to quantify and often not valued in traditional accounting. Natural capital assessments aim to provide information on the matter; they help understand the ecosystem services structures, involving quantitative estimates. Valuating ecosystem services aims to cultivate appreciation for the invisible benefits from nature [@AnneBlog], which too often happens only upon their loss [@daily2000].

![Examples of how a natural capital-based approach can be used to mainstream enviromental information throughout the development planning process, contributing to more effective and efficient development plannign decisions, from [@Myanmar16]](../images/mymy.png){#fig:mymy}

Because degradation or loss of ecosystem benefits incurs costs, for example for water treatment, erosion control, infrastructure maintenance and disaster relief; they undermine security, prosperity and economic development. Therefore, a thorough understanding of natural capital assets is crucial. Natural capital assessments locate the sources of ecosystem services, provide indications for sustainable management, identify and prioritize conservation activities, help build understanding of synergies and trade-offs between the needs and impacts of different projects or sectors, support policy design, and contribute to climate resilience and adaptation planning. Based on this understanding, enlightened decisions can be taken to secure these assets in a context of social and economic development [@Myanmar16]. In short, natural capital assessments aim to make it easier for nature to become a primary consideration in all decisions, by revealing the specific benefits it provides [@AnneBlog]. Natural capital assessments document ecosystem services at different levels, from local ones such as pest control, to regional ones like flood control, to global services such as climate stabilization [@daily2000]. They reveal interdependencies between services, critical points and timescales for degradation and recovery. 

Natural capital assessments are context-dependent and complex [@daily2000]. In short, they generally consist in identifying the different alternatives, quantifying their respective impacts, and valuating their respective consequences. A common measuring unit for this last step of valuation is monetary, but outcomes are not always aggregated into monetary terms [@daily2000]. However, an important clarification that must be highlighted when presenting the concept of natural capital, is that it is not merely putting a dollar tag on nature. On the contrary, the natural capital assessments approaches aim to correct capitalist society bias that make decisions based on economical return on investment; by including nature in the capitalist approach. Monetary valuation is just one small aspect of natural capital assessment, that helps connect in some contexts of financial planning and comparisons [@AnneBlog]. Furthermore, valuating natural capital is not a new concept; 20 years ago, @costanza1997value estimated the value of the entire biosphere to be around 33 trillion dollars per year (considered a minimum estimate, with significant uncertainty associated). This is the magnitude of two times the US GNP. (*bpb: About this last sentence: Ben says : This seems out of place, like something you felt “should” be included and you weren’t sure where to put it? Cha says: I guess… Although can’t really find a better place !)*


## Motivation

### Analysis of the display needs
The display tasks gathered in the survey (detailed in section \ref{sec:survey}) appeared to be right on point as the average scores, in terms of general usefulness, were all higher than 3.5, 84% were higher than 4.0 and 47% higher than 4.5. These results prove the relevance of these display tasks. *(bpb: repeat list of display tasks from survey or unnecessary?*)

### Multiplying impact by improving communication
So natural capital assessment involve a deep understanding of phenomenas and their interaction, which results from painstaking studies and precise modeling. *(bpb > you say this is subjective and also not always true.How would I express that they results from a big effort/lots of work from ES analysts ..?)* However, these efforts will do little to achieve their intended goal of informing decisions unless the insights they generate are effectively communicated to provide usable information to decision-makers. It had been shown that judgement often results from fast and automatic processing, generally prompted by visuals [@McMahon2016]. Therefore, the present work aims to put an emphasis on this last step of process, that is, conveying the results – in particular, strategies for visualization, which are often time neglected in time-limited projects which had focused on the previous steps.

Visualization is the main focus of this work, because it has been proven to be easier for the brain to understand an image than words or numbers [@Cukier]. Because of their abilities to synthesize large amounts of data into effective displays [@Ware2000], graphics have been widely used in the literature, and the topic of information visualization widely studied (by Cleveland, Ware, Tufte among others). Visualizations support both data analysis and data presentation.  Effective visuals are crucial to achieve the intended goal of informing their audience. The latter is the focus of this work, which assumes that at least some initial results are generated. However, visualizations are not distinctly intended to serve just one purpose, and the same displays may also be of use for exploratory analysis by the analyst, to help build insight, especially to the extent that both an analyst's own work and their stakeholder engagement are iterative. It has been shown that combining optimization with visualization promotes design innovations and empowers decision makers with a better understanding of systems behaviors (see for example the work of @Kollat_Video, @Reed04, @Fleming05, @Winer02.

Mapping, defined by @Englund as the organization of spatially explicit quantitative information, has proven essential for many assessments of ES [@Troy]. @Hauck showed how the spatial products from mapping - maps - are tremendously helpful to support proper management of ecosystems and ecosystem services. However, he also brings attention to the fact that they should be used carefully. Visualizations of large datasets and complex information is a very effective way to conveying knowledge, but it is also non-trivial, which might explain why this topic is given so much attention in the literature. *(bpb: last sentence better?)*. 
##Objectives
This document aims to be a toolbox to guide analysts in their task of communicating natural capital information. The overall goal is to improve the impact of natural capital assessments, and develop approaches to manage environmental assets sustainably and take nature more into account in major decisions. Effective communication of their results, including clear visualization, is crucial for supporting decision-makers. 

First (chapter {sec:elements}), we provide background knowledge about the basics of data visualization, guidelines for successful implementation and an overview of the multiple visualization tools.

Then (chapter \ref{sec:UserGuide}), we gather existing knowledge on design strategies for displaying specifically the type of data encountered in natural capital assessments, i.e typically large numbers of maps and aspatial statistics that result from considering multiple objectives, scenarios, and uncertainties.

## How to read this document
This document is intended to support and guide analysts in their task of communicating natural capital information. It is a toolbox, structured around four main themes: displaying multi-dimensional data, spatial data, comparing multiple versions of spatial data and expressing uncertainty. It aims to suggest display solutions for each of the display tasks previously identified. Each proposed display is explained, discussed (pros and cons) and illustrated with relevant use cases and/or examples. These solutions were selected based on several criterion (see section \ref{sec:criterion}). However, when it comes to data visualization and clarity, some subjectivity cannot be avoided. Also, data visualization is really a case-by-case and efficient displays really depends on the underlying data and information to convey. This user guidance aims to serve as a basis and an inspiration to the analyst, suggesting several options to be used and adapted to each case. Tailoring the displays is essential. For example, the suggested displays have different degrees of complexity and the analyst should pick a complexity level according to :

* the audience targeted: *Who is the display intended for ? What is their level of knowledge about the project and their familiarity with scientific visualizations ?*
* the time at disposition: *Should this convey just the key results or go in depth about the analysis ?*
* the document type: *Static, dynamic, interactive ?* 
* the presentation type: *Should this be self explanatory or will it be presented by the analyst ?*

The reader is expected to skim through the suggested displays. Fast referencing allows to jump between sections in this interactive document; the web visualizations listed have embedded links. For a quick answer to a specific display need, table \ref{sec:table} summarizes the relevant options for the main display tasks, and links to appropriate tools.
\
\

An important preliminary note: plots and graphs are not always necessary. Sometimes, the full data table is the best visualization. For example, in the case of an mid-project intermediary report for a meeting with experts on the project, it is likely that plots will lead to questions digging in details, where showing the full dataset and how solution were selected and compared to each other is necessary.