#Introduction>*"Often the importance of ecosystem services is widely appreciated only upon their loss"*
>
>\
>
> *Gretchen Daily, in The Value of Nature and the Nature of Value*
> 

##Background & motivation 
### Ecosystem services
Food, water, fuel, fiber, timber, pollination, purification, medicinal plants, inspirational and recreational landscapes are examples of essential gifts from nature making life possible and worthwhile. These are defined as ecosystem services. They can be tangible or intangible.Some are obvious, some are less. Forests, for example, not only provide a natural carbon storage that helps regulate climate, but also hold soil in place along streams, therefore improving water quality, which benefits for people downstream. Habitats in rivers and along coastlines support populations of fish that provide food, including in areas of chronic food insecurity. Biodiversity stabilize ecosystems [@cardinale2012]. Mangroves stabilize shorelines and decrease damage to people and property from storms. Oceans also store carbon. (TODO reference)

These services rely on complex interactions of many forms of natural capital; the ecosystems that surround us are essential to our survival and well-being, and are the bedrock of a sustainable economy. Nature and people form the biosphere, caring for the former equates to caring for the latter and vice versa. Increasingly, we can map the most important forests, coastal habitats and other ecosystems and show how they support us. This is crucial in order to prioritize the use of resources and sustainably manage our natural world. In short, nature is at the source of human well-being: people depend on nature. 

However, about 60% of the ecosystem services are being degraded[^2back] or are not used sustainably. Not only depletion of natural capital is a major loss of natural asset, but it harms significantly human well-being [@Millennium2005]. Furthermore, the relationships between harm to an ecosystem and loss in its services are rarely linear and generally the impacts are multiplied and affect every dependant ecosystem process [@cardinale2012].

[^2back]: evaluated by the Millenium Assessments [@Millennium2005].

As the abundance of natural capital decreases, due to clear and increasing human alteration [@Vitousek494], citizens and scholars are increasingly highlighting the urgency of taking action. To do so, efficient policy design requires a strong (often quantitative) understanding of ecosystem services functioning.

###Natural capital assessments

The benefits nature provides to people and the economy are difficult to quantify and often not valued in traditional accounting. Natural capital assessments aim to provide information on the matter; they help understand the ecosystem services structures, involving quantitative estimates. Valuating ecosystem services aims to cultivate appreciation for the invisible benefits from nature [@AnneBlog], which too often happens only upon their loss [@daily2000].

Because degradation or loss of ecosystem benefits incurs costs, for example for water treatment, erosion control, infrastructure maintenance and disaster relief; they undermine security, prosperity and economic development. Therefore, a thorough understanding of natural capital assets is crucial. Natural capital assessments locate the sources of ecosystem services, provide indications for sustainable management, identify and prioritize conservation activties, help build understanding of synergies and trade-offs between the needs and impacts of different projects or sectors, support policy design, and contribute to climate resilience and adaptation planning. Strong of this understanding, enlightened decisions can be taken to secure these assets in a context of social and economic development [@Myanmar16]. In short, natural capital assessment hopes to make it easier for nature to become a primary consideration in all decisions, by revealing the specific benefits it provides [@AnneBlog]. Natural capital assessments document ecosystem services at different levels, from local ones such as pest control, to regional ones like flood control, to global services such as climate stabilization [@daily2000]. They reveal interdependencies between services, critical points and timescales for degradation and recovery. 

![Examples of how a natural capital-based approach can be used to mainstream enviromental information throughout the development planning process, contributing to more effective and efficient development plannign decisions, from [@Myanmar16]](../images/mymy.png){#fig:mymy}

Natural capital assessments are context-dependent and complex [@daily2000]. In short, they generally consist in identifying the different alternatives, quantifying their respective impacts, and valuating their respective consequences. A common measuring unit for this last step of valuation is monetary, but outcomes are not always aggregated into monetary terms [@daily2000]. However, an important clarification that must be highlighted when presenting the concept of natural capital, is that it is not merely putting a dollar tag on nature. On the contrary, the natural capital assessments approaches aim to correct capitalist society bias that make decisions based on economical return on investment; by including nature in the capitalist approach. Monetary valuation is just one small aspect of natural capital assessment, that helps connect in some contexts of financial planning and comparisons [@AnneBlog]. Furthermore, valuating natural capital is not a new concept; 20 years ago, @costanza1997value estimated the value of the entire biosphere to be around 33 trillion dollars per year (considered a minimum estimate, with significant uncertainty associated). This is the magnitude of two times the US GNP. (*bpb: About this last sentence: Ben says : This seems out of place, like something you felt “should” be included and you weren’t sure where to put it? Cha says: I guess… Although can’t really find a better place !)*

### Communicating natural capital information
So natural capital assessment involve a deep understanding of phenomenas and their interaction, which results from painstaking studies and precise modeling. *(bpb > you say this is subjective and also not always true.How would I express that they results from a big effort/lots of work from ES analysts ..?)* However, these efforts will do little to achieve their intended goal of informing decisions unless the insights they generate are effectively communicated to provide usable information to decision-makers. It had been shown that judgement often results from fast and automatic processing, generally prompted by visuals [@McMahon2016]. Therefore, the present work aims to put an emphasis on this last step of process, that is, conveying the results – in particular, strategies for visualization, which are often time neglected in time-limited projects which had focused on the previous steps.

Visualization is the main focus of this work, because it has been proven to be easier for the brain to understand an image than words or numbers [@Cukier]. Because of their abilities to synthesize large amounts of data into effective displays [@Ware2000], graphics have been widely used in the literature, and the topic of information visualization widely studied (by Cleveland, Ware, Tufte among others). Visualizations support both data analysis and data presentation.  Effective visuals are crucial to achieve the intended goal of informing their audience. The latter is the focus of this work, which assumes that at least some initial results are generated. However, visualizations are not distinctly intended to serve just one purpose, and the same displays may also be of use for exploratory analysis by the analyst, to help build insight, especially to the extent that both an analyst's own work and their stakeholder engagement are iterative. It has been shown that combining optimization with visualization promotes design innovations and empowers decision makers with a better understanding of systems behaviors (see for example the work of @Kollat_Video, @Reed04, @Fleming05, @Winer02.

Mapping, defined by @Englund as the organization of spatially explicit quantitative information, has proven essential for many assessments of ES [@Troy]. @Hauck showed how the spatial products from mapping - maps - are tremendously helpful to support proper management of ecosystems and ecosystem services. However,  he also brings attention to the fact that they should be used carefully. Visualizations of large datasets and complex information is a very effective way to conveying knowledge, but it is also non-trivial, which might explains why this topic is given so much attention in the literature. *(bpb: last sentence better?)*
##The Natural Capital Project
>"The Natural Capital Project strives to improve the well-being of people and nature by integrating the value nature provides to society into all major decisions leading to greater and more targeted natural capital investments."

This work was done within the framework of the Natural Capital Project, at Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment. The Natural Capital Project (shortened NatCap) aims to account for nature’s contributions to society, so that decision-makers worldwide can take into account the value of ecosystem services, leading to wiser and more sustainable choices and better outcomes for people and nature. Founded in 2005, the Natural Capital Project gathers NGOs and academics, namely it is a partnership of four parties: the World Wild Fund (WWF), The Nature Conservancy (TNC), University of Minnesota and Stanford University [@Natcapwebsite].

NatCap's work falls in three types of activities: "advance science of ecosystem services, create user-friendly approaches and tools and build and tell success stories" [@StaciePrez]. NatCap develops tools meant to assess nature's contribution to society. All software developed at NatCap is open-source, to make the science accessible and useful in real decisions. The main one is InVEST which gathers several models tackling various ecosystem services such as water yield, sediment retention, carbon storage, wind energy, habitat quality and crop pollination. InVEST and related tools help users explore, map and value these ecosystem services and translate the change in ecosystem to its corresponding change in ecosystem services and to the impacts and benefits to people. Other software includes RIOS, used for targeting cost-effective investments for watershed services; OPAL, which quantifies the impacts of development and the value of offsetting them with protection and restoration; and the Python library PyGeoprocessing which implements GIS operations on which InVEST is based. For further details and examples of applications, @Ruckelshaus15 gives a good overview of NatCap's projects.

The ecosystem service assessment strategy NatCap follows can be summarized in 6 steps, with repeated iterations throughout the process [@StaciePrez]. First, define the partnership, roles and objectives. Secondly, compile the data. Thirdly, generate baselines and scenarios. In fourth, assess the corresponding outcomes. Then, synthesize the results. Last, but not least, inform decisions by communicating solutions. These two last steps correspond to the focus of this work.

![Natural Capital Approach [@greggg]](../images/natcapapproach.png){#fig:approach}

The present work integrates in the context of NatCap's approach; the developed tools aim to be incorporated MESH outputs and reports. Also, in the context of the developement plan for InVEST 4.0, one of the three long-term InVEST goals is to integrate reporting as part of the InVEST workflow [Rich Webinar 29/11/16], which this work could support. *Flag! todo future to revisit last paragraph*

##Objectives

> "Improving communication in the IPCC reports is by no means an easy task"
> \
> [@McMahon2016]

Developing visuals that communicate the complexities of climate science is admittedly difficult, even with existing visual tools and expertise. A preliminary part of this work consisted in identifying the specific challenges related to displaying ES results. ES information consists in varied, large, multi-dimensional datasets, 
typically large numbers of results that result from considering multiple objectives, scenarios, and uncertainties. These can be categorical or continuous, spatial or aspatial. The main tasks that these displays aim to support include scenario analysis, multi-objective comparisons, expression of uncertainty. Some cases may require combinations of these tasks.

Overall, this work aims to empower analysts and decision-makers with **easy approaches to clear ES visualizations and summaries**: effective solutions to synthesize and communicate spatial, multi-dimensional outputs of multiple runs for multiple ES models. It gathers an overview of existing display tools and builds upon these to improve natural capital visualizations. The first objective of this work is to identify the challenges and the needs for an efficient communication of results. In a second phase, the aim is to suggest powerful and innovative solutions to address these points. That is, support the ES analysts and scientists by orienting them to (1) the range of display options available, and when they are suitable and (2) to the range of implementations of these display options, pointing to streamlined implementations when possible, or providing template scripts to help ease the workflow of creating visualizations. An informative and practical guidance document gathers recommendations on best practice for ES analysts. Lastly (*and depending on the remaining time todo*), a framework for implementation of the proposed solutions could be developed, providing a tailored visualization interface suitable to the common issues identified previously. 

## Outline 
*Todo when structure final!*
This master thesis presents approaches to displaying natural capital information, with specific examples of use cases in Peru, Kenya and Hawaii. Section 2 describes the adopted methodology, presents the use cases on which the work was based and detail the corresponding workflow. Section 3 provides the context and background knowledge on the basic principles of data visualization, and it addresses the question of which tools to use. Section 4 gathers the existing knowledge on design strategies for displaying complex information, by summarizing an extended literature review that was conducted to explore the design strategies to displaying multi-dimensional, multi-objective, spatial and uncertain data. It suggests solutions for each identified display need, providing examples and tools. Table *(reference todo big table)* summarizes the most common visualization needs and links them to suggested solutions. Next, a new tool was build, implementing some of suggested solutions. Its design and implementation are discussed in section 5. Finally, section 6 provides a summary of this work, along with a discussion about future steps.


